Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Eleanor Sherry. She is professor at
the Max Planck Institute of Ge uh geo Anthropology
where she is the head of the Independent Max
Planck Human Pill Systems Research Group. She is an
archaeological scientist interested in exploring the articulation between material
culture, genetics and biogeography to further theoretical methodological and
scientific advances in the field of human evolution. And
today we're talking about how we study human evolution,
the origins of Homo sapiens, whether it was in
one single location or multiregional in Africa, our dispersal
within Africa out of Africa migrations and other related
topics. So, Doctor Sherry, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for having me.
So just to introduce the topic here, tell us
a little bit about the kind of work you
do. I mean, when it comes to studying human
evolution, I guess that there would be many different
approaches here, but tell us perhaps generally how you
go about combining things like genetics, biogeography and material
culture to study human evolution.
Sure, I think we still have quite a romantic
idea about, you know, the, the lonely professor, a
renaissance professor who's good at everything, just working alone
and, and figuring everything out. But of course, the
reality nowadays is very different. I like to think
of it more like we're sort of like a
hockey team where everybody has, you know, a different
um role to play in that team. And we
can only find the answers if we are able
to work together. And that can be challenging because
the field of human origins is is incredibly diverse.
So there is a single theme we want to
know where we come from, but there are many
different ways to approach um the answer to that
question which involve many different uh fields of research
from like you mentioned genetics to archaeology, fossil studies,
climate studies. So it can be really diverse. But
I think we're all getting better at understanding each
other and being able to work together. And that's
what we try to do in my group uh
which includes people with a background in in genetics,
in geochemistry, in geo chronology, in archaeology, um fossil
studies and so on. And together we all contribute
independent lines of evidence that come towards us, being
able to make sense of a coherent whole and
try to understand this basic question. Who are we
and where do we come from?
And so, I mean, one of the biggest questions
slash debates in paleoanthropology that has been running for
a while and I guess it's still an active
debate is about whether Homo sapiens, our species of
course originated in one single location in Africa or
if it was multi regional. So what would you
say are the best arguments coming from people from
both sides?
Yeah. So I think, I think it's important to,
to think about sort of the historic nature of
this debate. So for a long time, it was
unclear whether humans originated in Africa or somewhere else.
Uh I think Asia was a major candidate, but
others claimed it might have been Europe. And this
debate really crystallized um into two opposing views that
were very, very different in their nature. So the,
the, the first and older model, the multiregional model
saw humans originating from um across the old world.
So that's Africa, Europe and Asia. And the idea
was that populations lived in these different regions and
there was some degree of gene flow between them,
but essentially the humans that originated in, in these
regions are still the people living here today. And
that this model essentially explains the differences we see
between people today. Um But um there was another
view put forward um prominently by Professor Chris Christopher
Stringer at the Natural History Museum and he looked
at the fossil record um in both Africa and
Eurasia and he looked at more complex statistical analyses
for the first time. Um And although we didn't
have dates going back to this time period when,
when these researchers were first active, um he looked
at the different traits on fossil skulls. So for
example, the shape of the chin or the space
between the orbits of the eye, the shape of
the back of the skull, all sort of physical
traits like this and looked at the differences between
them. And he started to see a pattern in
which um the African fossils were more consistently closer
to um modern humans today than fossils coming from
Europe and Asia, from the Pleistocene at some point
in the Pleistocene. And so he proposed that humans
originated in Africa. And this really went contrary to
the established model and I don't think you can
exaggerate the effect in which this has was really
profound. So we see many um headlines today in
the newspaper saying, you know, researchers rewrite story of
human origins. I mean, we, we haven't, this was
genuinely the last time really this happened. Um Other
than when we discovered that there was some interbreeding
with, for example, neanderthals. So this was a huge,
huge um upset and it upset a lot of
people. Um And the debate didn't really start to
become resolved until uh fossils started to be better
dated. And we started to see that the oldest
fossils were indeed African fossils. And um and then
we started to have genetics starting to come in
in the 19 eighties. The first results looking at,
um DNA um suggested that um the oldest um
lineages were African. Now, at some point, um there
emerged a scholarly consensus based on all this information
that Africa was a homeland of humanity. But at
some point that discussion turned into a, a sort
of a where in Africa um discussion, which wasn't
really in the original debates, it was sort of
Africa versus the rest of the old world. And
nowhere was a suggestion that there was one place
or one population in Africa that played a role,
but somehow, um this is, this is what it
became. Um But I think there has been a
little bit of a vindication for the multiregional lists
in that. Um We now know that there was
some gene flow between our species and other forms
of human that existed in the Pleistocene, namely Neanderthals
and Denisovans. And even though that's a very, very
small percentage of what makes us human, so it
doesn't change the fact that humans originate in Africa.
It does mean that some, some small part of
that multiregional model did have some truth. So I
think in some ways everybody won a little bit
of, of those debates.
A and so, uh but let's focus then on
Africa, since at least that I guess is consensual
when it comes to whether we originated from one
single population in Africa or subdivided populations in Africa
at this point, at least, what do we know
about that? What does the best evidence out there
point to?
Ok. I think, I think to answer that question,
we need to go back in time and try
to understand where that question even came from because
it wasn't part of the Africa versus multiregional debate.
The Af the traditional debates that raged across the
eighties and the seventies before that was, um, did
it happen across Africa? Did it happen across the
old world? And then in the 19 eighties, the
genetic argument ultimately won. And then we started to
get all the results of the geo chronology showing
that the African fossils were the oldest. But the
way human evolution began to be represented, moved from
these sort of popular linear kind of progression models
to something that looks more like a tree, these
phylogeny that we're all familiar from this tree of
life idea. And an intuitive part of that model
is that there has to be a point of
beginning and a point of beginning. It's very easy
to move from thinking about that to thinking that's
a physical time and place. But if you think
about the way evolution works, then it's, it's a
little bit more problematic because evolution is the process.
It's not as if um you know, so there
was this process of evolution that stopped, we appeared
and that's the end of history, you know, we,
we, we still evolving. We are today a snapshot
in time and we will, we're still around a
million years from now will be different again. And
so the question of where in Africa did we
evolve? And is it one place or many wasn't
really a debate in the same way that out
of Africa? Sorry, that, that human evolution was a
debate with multiregional and versus African origin because the
idea that we evolved in one place in Africa
was an idea that sort of happened very slowly
and that there was a tacit understanding of based
on the way we represented human evolution. So at
some point, the search for a single center of
endemism somehow became justified over time. And from the
nineties to the noughties onwards, we started to see
an increasing number of papers sort of making these
arguments about, for example, Eastern Africa being the homeland
of humans. And we started to see these pictures
and magazines and documentaries of humans walking along Kilimanjaro
in the background, you know, these sort of iconic
Savannah pictures. And I think, you know that the
re insidiously took root in people's mind and we
stopped even questioning how much sense this model had.
But as I mentioned, evolution is, is a is
a long and slow process. And humanity has very
deep roots in Africa. And the process of evolution
didn't take place in one place, it took place
in many different places because people moved around. So
in certain places, you can imagine particular traits appearing
and then in others different ones appearing. And so
there is a spatial and temporal element to human
evolution. It's not something that appears as a package
out of the ground in one place at one
time. And so as, as these um questions about
the center of endemism really started to take hold
and there was this push for East Africa, it
sort of gave researchers like me pause for thought.
First of all, because, you know, a lot of
the research was taking place in places like Eastern
Africa because this is where fossils were being found,
this incredibly rich, amazing fossil fossiliferous area. But the
question is, did humans, is this really ground zero
for human evolution or is this just a place
where we happen to be finding fossils? So is
there some element of preservation bias here? And we
only look here because we expect to find fossils
and because we find fossils there, then we're saying
this is where humans came from. Um And, and,
and the other question to me was, of course,
um you know, we, we don't ask these questions
of other animals. We say, what, what was the
center of origin of? I don't know the whales,
you know, or, or, you know, I mean, like
it's, it's, it's, it's a really, you know, or
even one species of whales because it was one
species of humans, like where do humpback whales come
from? You know, these sort of questions are difficult
to ask because animals move around. And then of
course, we started to see that a lot of
the, the fossils, early human fossils actual or putative,
you know, because people really get, get into these
debates. But a lot of the early fossils that
have a lot of features in common um with
us and each other don't appear from in one
place, they appear across the African continent at much
the same age. So in, in um in Eastern
Africa as well, there's um old evidence of material
culture um that's associated with, with Homo sapiens, but
we found material culture that's just as old. Um
The same material culture is distilled in, in Southern
Africa and northern Africa. And so the picture we
started to see is that you don't have the
fossils on the material culture appearing in one place
and radiating outwards from a single point of origin
instead across the African continent. We're seeing much the
same processes happening at much the same time. So
this suggests that there is more of a sort
of distributed origin story going on and that's what
we wanted to make sense of.
But actually, this is uh uh I mean, a
very interesting debate and even I have here from
2019, that is five years ago, less than five
years ago because I think it was in the
summer of 2019 that the paper came out by
E Chen, all titled Human Origins in the Southern
African Paleo wetland and first migrations that's still going
back to uh uh uh basically this debate. In
this case, the researchers here were making a case
that um perhaps we have originated in 11 single
population. But in this case, it would be more
to the south of Africa around bots one if
I remember correctly. So this is still ongoing.
Right. Yes. So the, the idea of, of a
single center of endemism, um which is what they're
calling for is actually sort of this older idea
that people have had for a while. So it,
it is a sort of theory that had existed
for maybe a couple of decades. And yes, they
published this in 2019, which is I think was
a year after our first paper trying to push
back on this idea and saying it doesn't fit
the evidence. Um And the idea that, you know,
Southern Africa was uh the sort of home of
humanity has also been something that was pushed for
a while in, in, in many ways, in a
very problematic fashion. There was, you know, even this
idea that that certain um modern populations of humans
living in Southern Africa were somehow some relics of
the past, which is, which is an idea that
that's very problematic because everybody has changed from 300,000
years ago. There is, there's no such thing as
a, you know, a relic from the past. Um
And so, you know, some of these ideas are
a little bit problematic in this way as well.
But yes, they, they did publish this paper and
um you know, iii, I don't like to sort
of go out all our criticisms of, of other
people's work and I think they did do some
things in this paper that were commendable, like trying
to bring in um a, a climate story and
trying to link it to the genes, I think,
you know, that's, it's a really kind of good
thing to do. But unfortunately, this paper does suffer
from a number of what I guess I call
inferential pitfalls. And the biggest problem with it is
it makes these very bold claims, you know, the
homeland of, of humans. But the, the data that
it's based on is very weakly informative. Um It
also treats genetic lineages as real populations and problematically,
it also assumes regional population continuity for hundreds of
thousands of years. So while maybe the other aspects
of the paper can be a little bit hard
to grasp because they're quite technical issues. Um I
think it's very easy to understand that you have
to find a group of people living today, even
if all their arguments are right. But you find
a group of people living today in southern Africa
doesn't mean their ancestors were there two or 300,000
years ago. Are you really trying to make a
claim that people haven't moved in that entire time
frame? But you know, I can, I can break
this down for you a little bit. Um
Sure, go ahead.
So this paper uses 100 and 98 I think
it was mitochondrial genomes from present day South African
individuals. Um And these were new and then it
combined them with about 1000 uh more or less
already published genomes. And so that sounds like a
lot, you know, you have like around 1200 genomes
that they're working with. Um But the first issue
is that it uses mitochondrial DNA. Um MITOCHONDRIAL DNA
comes from the mitochondria, which is this organ now
that we have in our cell that essentially powers
up the cell. And they are, they are interesting
because they have their own genome that's easier to
study. And it's separate from the DNA find in,
in the, in the cell nucleus. And although nuclear
DNA is, is, is clearly the the the area
where you're going to find most informative for ancestry,
sometimes it can be useful to look at mitochondrial
DNA because it's simpler. And indeed, you know, the
early papers back going back to the 19 eighties
that pointed human origins back to Africa did this
using mitochondrial DNA. So it does tell us something,
but it doesn't tell us a lot. Unlike nuclear
DNA, it doesn't recombine with each generation. So what
that means is that um with every generation, you
inherit 50% of your DNA, more or less from
one parent and 50% from the other uh as
do your siblings, but the sections that you inherit
are not the same like your brother or sister
have different, which makes you different. And so you're
losing a little bit of ancestry every time. So
you won't have the exact same DNA as your
father or your mother and then your Children won't
again. So you're losing a little bit of information
every time. Um But with the, with um with
mitochondrial DNA, you don't really inherit anything other than
the mitochondrial DNA from your mother. So it's from
your mother's mother's mother's mother. It's inherited down the
female line. So if you go back 200,000 years,
um it, it's much less informative than nuclear DNA.
Um It, it doesn't recombine first of all. So
you're not sort of, you don't have this continual
process of getting this recombination, but you're absorbing, you,
you lose information but you gain information. Um But
with mitochondrial DNA, by the time you coalesce back
to the most recent common ancestor, you have retained
only a really small fraction of the DNA. Um
THAT um um of the ancestry that you would
have had within that time frame. So all the
ancestry that you had in the last 300,000 years
going going back is, is really most of that
is lost if you just look at mitochondrial DNA.
So it doesn't really matter if you have 1200
mitochondrial genomes, you're still not gonna have most of
the information from the human past, which means that
you have very little influential power. So it creates
a huge problem if you're going to make a
strong statement about events that took place hundreds of
thousands of years ago. So just a little bit
of a contrast with genome wide studies where you're
looking at nuclear DNA, you can look at individual
genes and create gene trees for individual genes going
back hundreds of thousands of years. You look at
these independent gene trees and you gain several orders
of magnitude, more statistical power. But even with this,
without ancient DNA, it's extremely difficult to make precise
inferences about populations in the deep past because many
different demographic events can generate similar signals. And so
it's very difficult to distinguish between models and you,
you essentially fall into a trap where it's very
difficult to make assumptions about the human past that
are, are justified because you need to make assumptions
about human mobility in that intervening period. So that's
the problem with the data. So the next issue
is is with lineages generally. So, so we talk
about lineages, whether they're from mitochondrial DNA or individual
genes. Um But it's important not to confuse these
with populations and not populations. So if I derive
um a tree from an individual gene on my
DNA, that's not my population history, that's the history
of a gene. Mhm. And today multiple distinct lineages
are usually shared across many different populations. OK. And
that um that degree of sharing will be an
outcome of all sorts of random processes that are
shaped by population, demographic history, things of population movements
and so on. There's no reason to assume that
this would have been any different in the past.
And in fact, it, you know, it probably wasn't.
So it is really problematic to take say a
branch from mitochondrial DNA tree and assign it to
something that scientists call Haler groups, which are often
then viewed as population. So we say I came
from Haler group, a one, you know, that, that's
a sort of random branch that some geneticist has
assigned on a tree, it's not a population. Um
But unfortunately, it does get confused by these sort
of ancestry companies that give them these names and
sort of say, you know, you came from this
population called HAPA group. A one that came from
the Middle East. I mean, this is storytelling. Um
So this is why that's a problem. Um And
in addition to this, there were some statistical problems
with the, with the analysis um itself where some
assumptions of the tests were violated, but that's quite
complicated. But in, in, in any sense, I don't
think that matters as much as understanding the flaws
of the data set itself. But really, even if
we ignore all this, let's say, let's say they're
right. And there is some evidence in, in this,
in this to show that the ancestors of this
population were somehow um the original humans. How can
you say that they come from Southern Africa without
making the assumption that their ancestors were there 200,000
years ago? And how do you square that with
the abundant archaeological evidence of population movement, long range
contracts on migration? Um All the fossil data. So,
you know, it's, it's really problematic because there's a
lot of, a lot of data that's missed out
that could have been in informative. And chan and
colleagues also refer to the fact that they're looking
for the origin of anatomically modern humans. And I've
seen this in a sort of a response in
interview and challenge. It's like we're not looking at
the origins of humans, we're looking at the origin
of anatomically modern humans. Ok. So what does that
mean? Because fossils show that modern and more primitive
anatomical traits that we no longer see today appear
in different individuals in different mixtures? So some skull
from one part of Africa might have more of
a rounded brain case, but like a more archaic
face, while someone else might have quite a more
of an archaic brain case, but like a really
modern face or, you know, diff different features. Um
And we see this mix um for a long
time and people like us. So people who, who,
who have the constellation of traits that define modern
people living today don't start to appear in single
individuals until sometime between 140,000 years ago. So that's
long after we knew that humans emerged or anatomically
modern humans emerged. So even this sort of language
is sort of problematic. And of course, it ignores
the fact that fossils come from across the African
continent and, and not just in one place. I
mean, I think many former studies have demonstrated the
danger of making assumption, uh uh assumptions are made
of made unlimited data. So there have been many
studies in the past where people have said this
is how it is very, very strongly. And then
you find out that actually it was completely wrong,
but this paper did receive like really wide dissemination,
it was really, really well publicized. And you know,
the problem then for us is to try to
correct those mistakes, to reach out to the public
and say actually this is incorrect without causing people
to lose their faith in science during a time
when actually, I think we are having a crisis
of people's confidence in science. And each new headline
that says human history has been rewritten is, is
really re reinforcing that, you know, we are not
rewriting everything we know about um human prehistory worth
filling in the gaps, right? But I'm going to
sell a headline like that.
No, I totally understand that. And I mean, when
it comes to why these kinds of questions matter.
I mean, why does it matter whether we came
from one single population or several different populations in
Africa? I guess that it's not only the fact
that we, of course, it's important for us to
get the science right. Because this is a not
getting the knowledge about our past as almost Sapiens
and other s right. Which, even if you're only
intellectually interested in it, I guess you already, it,
it's important to get it right. But also when
it comes to the science communication aspect of it,
as you pointed to there, it's really frustrating because
these studies come out and sometimes they get a
lot of press and then people are where they
have the the idea in mind that they came
to a conclusion, a definite conclusion and they didn't
really intend to correct people's ideas, the ideas of
the more general population is very, very, very hard
without people losing faith in science more generally, right?
But also I would imagine and please correct me
if I'm wrong here. But I would imagine that
another reason why this might be problematic and why
these kinds of questions matter is that many times
they are not only informed by, but they also
inform some soc sociopolitical cultural issues. Like for example,
our origins in Africa or before we arrived at
that, at that consensus elsewhere. I mean, these issues
get very political, very quickly, uh usually for bad
reasons because they tend to be associated with racism
and other kinds of bigotry. Uh And I mean,
that, that's also another issue that we have to
take into account. Right. I mean, they, they are
informed by this but they also inform those political,
uh, let's say, manifestations and ideologies.
Right. Yes, I think you're absolutely right. Um, THEY
do people, um, the way they, they imagine ancestry
is how they think about, like, their recent ancestry.
So everyone likes to think maybe about human origins,
the way they might think about like the origin
of their own ethnic group, their own family, their,
their nation. And it, it rapidly gets mixed up
in these ideas and people end up having an
emotional connection. They want to look at ancestors who
look and sound and behave like them. Mhm And
so if you say, well, your ancestors didn't look,
behave or sound like you and went even from
the same region and some people can have an
emotional reaction against that and it makes them upset.
Um Especially if you, you're pointing to a very
different part of the world, maybe the one they've
never visited, maybe even one that they have some
bigoted ideas about. Um So you know, how, how
do we counteract that? Um And I think first
of all is, is we need to educate people
on how they should think about ancestry generally because
your deep ancestry should not be thought of like
a family tree, even the way we think about
our family tree is wrong because usually our family
tree is a story of a surname, just one
surname. Um The surname of all the other women
who married into that family that gets lost. So,
you know, you're still losing like most of the
information, even when you think about a regular family
tree, if we go further back in time and
you ask, what is the origin of people living
today? The answer would be different again, because most
of the genetic mutations have defined populations living today
appeared in the last 8000 years. So they appeared
really with the advance of agriculture and the major
biophysical changes that precipitated. So even, you know, I'm
not even going to say like, well, we're all
the same as people living 300,000 years ago because
we're not, we're more similar to people living much
later on in time because we are continually changing.
We're part of a story that twists and changed
and we, we can, we should never think about
immutable types that have always existed and will always
exist. We change, we are dynamic and we will
change again. People will get upset about what people
are saying about us now probably. And that's really
how we should, we should think about our ancestry.
So your question really has to be well defined.
What is my origin as a person from Malta
goes back to medieval times with um when, when
the Maltese Islands were conquered by the Islamic dynasty
from, from Tunisia where we got like our language
and where people, you know, were replaced, the Byzantine
people who lived here before, you know. So that's
a completely different question to what is my origin
as? Um I don't know, like a European or
what is my origin as a human? You know,
the they're different scales and I think people need
to be a lot more clear on what, what
they're answering um because people have changed and we
will continue to change and we are in many
ways very different to somebody living 300,000 years ago
and in many ways, very similar in terms of
our capacities as humans.
Mhm A and so when it comes to understanding
how we evolved in Africa, I guess that this
sort of debate between people who think we have
evolved in one single location versus the more dispersed
idea, let's say, I also inform some of the
ways we think about the selective pressures we, we
were exposed to because many times particularly in the
media, the press and so on. When these types
of questions uh are explored, people say or make
claims like for example, oh, we've evolved in the
rain forest or we've evolved in the, in the
Savan or something like that. But if the dispersed
model is the correct one, then how diverse were
actually the landscapes we Homo Sapiens inhabited and evolved
across Africa.
I think that's a really good question. I actually
think it's one of the most exciting questions we
can ask at the moment because you know, the
minute we move away from a single location and
population model, then we're faced with the vastness of
Africa and the diversity of Africa, the highlands lowlands
regions of diverse forest from dense rainforests. It's sp
savannahs, mangroves on the coast, there's deserts, arid zones,
great lakes, rivers. Um And of course, all these
environments are like dynamically shifting. So what, what's rainforest
today may not always have been rainforests in the
past. What's desert today may not always have been
desert in the past. So we have these dynamic
shifting landscapes and we're also faced with what we
know about humans today that humans are the only
animal on earth that has managed to colonize every
single landscape from polar regions. Um Tundra desert, I
mean, it, it, it's incredible and you know, is,
is this something that only appeared recently or have
humans somehow always been able to do this? So
we have this weird juxtaposition in which we've been
insisting on looking at humans as type to grasslands
for most of human history. And this is something
that's really at odds with our reality. Um And
also I think we have to look at bias
in the record. So, um you know, we've really
not scratched the surface of Africa. So I think
there's an impression out there that you know, researchers
have been working in Africa for a really long
time, really kind of combed the continent and we've
found these 10 skulls, you know, um, but the
reality is we found maybe fossils from like 10%
of Africa and like 90% of Africa, we know
very little about archaeological sites, maybe 25% of Africa,
75% of Africa we know nothing about. So we
know nothing about most of Africa. In other words,
and we've been extrapolating from small regions to like
vast regions. So if we do that and we
know that we, we can adapt to all these
different landscapes today. And we know that probably we
didn't live in one region, then it's very reasonable
to hypothesize that actually many different landscapes across Africa
were inhabited by humans. Do we know that they
did inhabit all these landscapes? This is work in
progress. Um But we already know that humans, early
humans lived in man, yeah, mangrove forests and eco
to regions, you know, they lived in coastal forests,
coastal grasslands, the edges of the desert. If, if
the question then is sort of, when did this
begin? When did this diversity begin? Do we see
it 300,000 years ago? Do we start seeing it
later in the record? The answer is we don't
know yet. So this is something that we're only
going to find out if we start to investigate
the whole of the African continent, if we want
to understand human origins in a more realistic framework.
So we also have to look at bias in
the record. So it's, it's also much easier to
look at these open highland regions in Africa of
tectonic uplift where you find fossils, right? There's no
vegetation, the visibility is amazing. These things are eroding
out, there's uplift and you contrast that to dense
lowland jungle where you don't see anything vegetation everywhere,
preservation conditions are terrible, you know, bone very rarely
survives. But that doesn't mean people were not there.
And there's some really great research that's getting much
smarter at looking at the signals of of human
presence when you don't find maybe even artifacts or
fossils. So there's some really inspiring work, for example,
going on in the Amazonian rainforest where people are
looking at um the distribution of particular trees and
fruits and finding evidence that these things have been
moved around by people even though you might not
always find the archaeology. So I think there are
um really exciting new ways that are emerging um
both within genetics and paleoecology to look at the
signatures of, of people even when you don't find
um physical objects or bones showing that people were
there. And I think a lot of these methodologies
can be applied in Africa to answer these questions
as well. So really to summarize um we don't
know the answer to your question. We don't know
how diverse and how early these environments were. But
my guess would be that really from, from the
beginning, proto humans and early humans were exploiting in
a range of different environments. And I think there'll
be some really exciting new research in this dimension.
I think it's a very exciting question to ask.
Mhm Yes. And I think that when it comes
to studying our origins and human evolution, I think
that uh you can look at it in two
different ways. You can look at it as being
a little bit frustrating. The fact that we will
probably always have an incomplete picture because we don't,
we won't find every single possible fossil out there
or some of them might be lost forever. Some
remains might not even have fossilized. So uh but
uh but you can also look at it uh
as a sort of um uh something that uh
that, that is really, I mean, interesting because uh
over time, I it's fascinating because over time knowledge
changes, you find uh a new site, you find
new remains, you, you get more oh And with
new technological developments, of course, as well. And with,
with new techniques, we get uh closer uh step
by step to a complete picture of human evolution.
So there's still ongoing work and lots of work
to do. But that's also fascinating, at least in
my understanding. So.
Yes, absolutely. I think when I was an undergraduate
back in the nineties, there was this sort of
sense that we knew most of it and we
were just sort of filling gaps. And now I
feel like I'm at a point where it's like
we know so little and it's still a story
to be told.
No, it's really fascinating because there, there have also
been over the past few decades, some more or
less prominent philosophers arguing for the end of science
because apparently we have already answered the main questions
of. But II, I think that that there's many
more interesting things to find out because the we
are not anywhere close to uh just closing the
book on science. There's many other things. OK. So
uh we've been talking a lot about Africa. What
about out of Africa migrations? I'm not sure if
it's a plural or singular here. Let's get into
that. So when it comes to migration out of
Africa, migrations for Homo Sapiens specifically because of course,
other previous ominous species also migrated out of Africa
like Homo erectus, for example. But when it comes
to Homo Sapiens for uh according to the best
understanding we have now, was it one single migration,
several different migrations? How did it play out exactly.
So I think it, it depends on what your
question is. So I think the answer is migrations,
if we're just looking at this purely as human
history, but we're looking at one migration, if we're
looking at the ancestry of all non Africans today.
So we know that humans originated some time shortly
before 300,000 years ago, let's say, let's give it
a date of around 300,000 years ago for convenience.
Um, BUT we also know that humans' ability to
get out of Africa is modulated by the Sahara
desert. This was a time of ice ages. And
when you have ice expanding in Europe, what you
have is desert expanding in North Africa. Uh WE
don't get the ice going that far south, but
you do get this sort of hyper aridity. Um
At the same time when the ice retreats, you
get more rainfall in northern Africa. And we see
the desert shrinking when of course, there is like
an expansive desert is very difficult for people and
animals to cross. But every time that desert shrinks
during the periods between ice ages, then they can
get out. And what we see is that they
did as along with other animals. The earliest signal
that we know so far that suggests a migration
out of Africa is as old as 260,000 years
ago. Around that time, the mitochondrial DNA of neanderthals
ends up being replaced by the Neanderthal. Uh THE
the mitochondrial DNA of a woman who was on
the lineage of Homo sapiens. There was nothing special
about that woman. It just so happened through stochastic
processes that Neanderthal populations which were quite small, just
ended up inheriting the mitochondrial DNA of this lineage
until the older Neanderthal mitochondrial DNA was completely replaced.
But what it would have been survives and what
we see in Denisovans. So some humans at a
very early stage get out of Africa and they
become absorbed in Neanderthal populations. So this is nothing
to do in a sense with like our story
of everyone, anyone living today. But it's still part
of the overall human story that I think is
really fascinating. And then we move forward in time
and we see fossils in in neighboring regions of
Africa um that also speak to this idea of
a desert retreat and people moving out. So, um
fossils in modern day re Carmel regions of Israel
and Saudi Arabia and Lebanon, we start finding like
these early fossils and perhaps even as far as
Greece finding um early fossils of of, of Homo
sapiens that are probably nothing to do with anybody
living today. But still we find them there. And
I think that's a really exciting story. But then
of course, the question is there were so many
disposals out of Africa. What was so special about
the later one that resulted in us? Why did
everyone die out, left Africa before this time? And
something between 60 50,000 years ago, some group left
Africa and they became successful enough that everyone who
is an African today can trace their ancestry to
this group. What was so special about them? Did
they have a special technology? Did they have something
special about their culture. Um Was it that they
live slightly longer, the grandparents who were around to
help with the Children? You know, what, what was
so special about them? The answer is we don't
know, we don't know. But I think at this
point we have to admit that there doesn't seem
to be any DNA that hasn't, that's still really
in hiding. I think maybe there's some, like, maybe
1% of DNA that no one's looked at where
that could potentially harbor the signature of an earlier
migration. But in like all the studies that have
happened, it's not there. And it really does look
like all Africans today are descended from this group
that lived 60 to 50,000 years ago, 1 1000
years ago. So what, what we can say for
sure is that even though this was a, a
small population, it was big enough to be viable,
maybe previous disposals were not. Um And they obviously
were not swamped by, by neanderthals. Um It still
was uh a genetic bottleneck for, for all Africans
because we can see that, you know, the DNA
we inherited from these people is, is really like
a small subset of the overall diversity we see
in Africa. So we didn't inherit all of that
diversity. We inherited a small part of it because
it was a small population that left Africa at
present. That's all we can really say. But it's
still a very interesting question. What was so special
about them? Did they have some ability to um
cope with the vastly different environments we see um
beyond Africa, uh we see diverse environments within Africa,
but they're not the same as what we see
beyond Africa. If you move north, you end up
in the pale optic zones, a significant temperature drop.
Or if you move to the east, you end
up in the monsoonal oriental zones. A much more
dense rainforest, much wetter even than the rainforest we
see in Africa. So you know that there are
major differences, perhaps there was enough of them and
they mix with some of the local Eurasian humans,
maybe they absorbed some genes for immunity against the
Eurasian diseases, maybe something like that help them out.
Um We don't really know that story but all
that can be said for sure is that there
were multiple dispersal out of Africa, but we non
Africans living today are only descended from one of
those dispersal.
And when it comes to that, uh last dispersal
from which we originated, um do we know exactly
the, I mean, information about the demographics and social
structure of that population that migrated out of Africa?
Because I was interested in understanding if something about
those factors might have played a role in their
success uh when they migrated out of Africa in
comparison to other earlier migrations. For example,
unfortunately, we just don't know, but we can start
to formulate some hypotheses. So for example, some genetic
studies have suggested there may be evidence supports um
intra African dispersal like uh an increase in inter
African dispersal prior to dispersal out of Africa, which
might mean that people were moving into new environments,
that they were able, better able to colonize new
environments. Maybe this gave them some special cultural advantage
when they were moving into new environments beyond Africa.
We don't see any evidence so far for any
technological developments with social developments, we already know that
some human groups, by that time, we're probably practicing
social networking. And um but you know, we, we
might see this at an early stage as well
because um some of the earlier dispersal out of
Africa, we see people using, for example, shell beads
and things like that. So maybe it's just personal
ornamentation, but maybe this is also some group signaling,
maybe it's part of like an extended social network
where people were helping each other more. And in
fact, we see this ethnographically today particular in um
particularly in regions where the carrying capacity is low.
So for example, maybe where it it doesn't rain
a lot, you don't have um a dense distribution
of food. So people have to cooper more to
food gathering and by building social networks, then if
times are bad for you, you know, you can
go to that tribe, you know, like three days
walk that way and they'll, they'll help you because
we've been exchanging gifts for like centuries, for example,
and the human's ability to do this and to
use material culture to say transcend co presence in
times before, like telephones, mobiles, the internet is like
really, really important because it allows us to use
social relationships to transcend space and time. And so,
if you know, humans are mastering this um at
an early stage, then maybe, you know, this also
gives us an edge, but it's not something you
can easily see in the archaeological record. Mhm um
As a very partial archaeological record. So, you know,
these are the sorts of questions I think we
can hypothesize about, but we certainly don't see, you
know, humans coming out of Africa and you say
something like, oh well, they have bow and arrow
technology and that's what gave them the edge. You
know, we don't see something that simple. It's clearly
not a simple story.
Uh What I was going to ask you is,
so you mentioned, for example, sometimes people trying to
point to certain technological developments as being behind the
success of that specific population in moving out of
Africa and expanding across the globe from that one
population, of course. But uh I perhaps, um at
least I personally don't care that much about what
kinds of technological developments did we bring from Africa.
But more the kinds of uh perhaps uh cultural
features, social structure, structure features that would allow for
us to move across different landscapes and step by
step, adapt technologically, culturally, to live in the different
kinds of environments, landscapes that we eventually occupied, I
guess. At least for me that's a more interesting
question than, oh, it was one population with bows
and arrows or whatever that, that went out of
Africa and they were already well equipped to survive
anywhere, you know.
Yeah. So, um, we don't, we don't know, but
we can imagine it must have been something like
that because we don't see um any sort of
smoking gun which is uh probably not the best
uh pun to use. But like we, we don't
see that for the technology. Um INSTEAD, we have
to assume it was something to do with how
people were able to network socially, how well they
were able to, to, to cooper and collaborate. And,
you know, I think this really speaks to like
our strengths as humans, right? That we, when we
want to, we can collaborate and we can achieve
great things. And we see this really at the
inception of humanity, we see a profound technological change
taking place at 300,000 years ago that speak to
this because we start to see elements in the
archaeological record that don't found together, that don't occur
together in nature. So you have for example, a
stone tip fixed to a wooden shaft using bindings
made of plant material or animal material, using resins
made according to recipes, you know, so you think
someone had to know where to find the ingredients,
someone had to know how to mix them properly.
Someone had to know how to make the spears
straight. Someone else is, is, is good at making
the stone tips and finding the right more material.
So this speaks to a co-operation at the very
root of, of who we are and using that
to um enhance our ability to survive to this
spurs and to adapt to new environments. And we
do adapt to new environments really quickly. You know,
we know we left Africa between 60 50,000 years
ago, that we reached Australia really rapidly passing through
very different environments. In Borneo, there's evidence of people
processing toxic tubers in order to make them edible,
um adapting to monkey hunting. And you know, you,
we see these changes happening very rapidly within like
a few generations. Um So clearly people were able
to cooper to, to adapt and to use their
social capital to be able to do this. It
wasn't just about, you know, who had the biggest
guns,
right? So, and when it comes to how we
dispersed out of Africa and the timings, because sometimes
we see in popular writings and elsewhere, uh those
need maps with precise dates as to how we
dispersed into the Arabian Peninsula and then along the
coast across India and then in to Oceania and
then eventually up north, uh a across the Bering
Strait into the Americans and so on. And uh
supposedly, we were in South America around 15,000 years
ago or so. But I, is that really precise?
Are those states precise? And these, the movement mostly
coastal across South Asia?
Um No, I, I would say that they're not
precise. They are really just a model and, you
know, as we know, all models are wrong, but
it's just the best representation of what we know
at the moment. So the dates are always based
on whatever dates we have to hand. If you
find something older, it's going to change everything. So,
um that's, that's sort of the way it has
to work. Um The, the idea of a, a
huge coastal dispersal doesn't stand up to scrutiny. Um
People I'm sure use coastal routes where it was
um useful to do so, but quite often it
wasn't useful and inland routes would have been better.
And I think a famous example of that is
a sort of out of Africa routes. Um There
was a debate as to whether people crossed the
Bab Al Mandab Strait from the Horn of Africa
to, to southern Arabia um across the Red Sea
or whether they went on a land route following
the Nile and going across the Sinai Peninsula and
then either going south into Arabia or going um
north up to uh the Levant area. Um So
far there's been no evidence to really support this
Bab Al Manda route. Um There's nothing, you know,
that sort of shows that there's, you know, time
wise or even artifact wise. It really supports that
so far. It looks like Southern Arabia is a,
is a, is a cultural sink. You know, people
get down there and then they sort of get
sort of stuck in these ecological bottlenecks and they
diversify and they develop very sort of individualized, independent
culture trajectories that are very interesting. But they, they
are interesting for their own sake rather than what
they're saying about this sort of overall story about
how people dispersed. Um The, the way we, we,
we tend to like to think about the region
um on these routes south of Africa is more
um when, when the, when the routes open and
close to the arid areas, um because they modulate
that dispersal. So they're very important for us to
understand how they work. And also to think about,
you know, the areas in terms of peripheral areas
and cause of human habitation. So some areas are
continually habitable, more or less while others open and
close. But they're both really important for understanding um
population connections because you can move into a core
area and you can stay there for jo generations.
But unless you can get out and go to
other core areas, then you have population separation and
it is the marginal areas in between and the
corridors that open and shut that allow people to
move around and exchange genes. So I think in,
in the, in the past, we've given a lot
of preeminence to the core areas because they're very
interesting. And you have these incredible sites that are
very deep and shows like continual um occupation. And
of course, they're like super interesting, I mean, amazing
places to work. But we've also found out that
unless we understand the margins in between and the
peripheral areas come and go in terms of habitability,
then we're only understanding half the human story. And
I think this is why understanding which, which areas
when they were warmer, when they were wetter when
it's possible to cross these regions, then we will
better understand, I guess those arrows on maps and
trying to make them more accurate.
And I would imagine that there are probably some
regions of the globe, like, for example, South Asia,
Central Asia that have been a little bit neglected,
right? In terms of studying fossils, their sites and
some other things like that. I mean, when it
comes to South Asia specifically, I'm trying to have
Doctor Sheila uh through uh on the show and
I think that she's done lots of work on
that about the how there's some many places across
South Asia where there's not been lots of work
done.
Right. Yes, absolutely. I mean, I think, you know,
we, we, I I've been speaking about Africa as
being a region where there hasn't been a lot
of work done, but actually that's also true of
vast regions of Asia as well. Um, BUT as
an Africanist, obviously, I, I tend to sort of
stick more to Africa because that's the area that
I study, but it's absolutely true of Asia as
well. And it's really important to understand how people
maybe get into areas like India that's hemmed in
by mountains, you know, once they get in, it's
not so easy to get out. So you have
processes of diversification that are really interesting um to
understand there as well. And of course, you know,
Eurasia was an empty. When Homo sapiens moved into
it, there were many different populations and I don't
think we're still completely clear on the degree of
diversity between these populations and the late survival of,
of, of, of different groups, whether they're the same
species or not is something that people argue a
lot about. I, I tend to avoid that discussion
because I think, you know, whether or not they
are or not, doesn't matter to me the fact
is they're on neanderthals, Denisovans and, and humans are
on separate evolutionary trajectories. They're clearly in a process
of separation. And I think, you know, that's, that's
the way we should think about it. Um So,
yes, I think, you know, it's really important to
understand all these peripheral regions, areas that haven't been
well studied um to understand what happened next in
the human story.
Mhm. Uh So, uh, before I move on to
the next question, let me just ask you. Do,
do you think that 10 minutes will be enough
to talk about Homo Sapiens in Saudi Arabia or?
Yeah, it should be. Yeah.
Yeah. Ok. Ok. So, uh, I have then one
last topic that I would like to ask you
about today. So I know that you've also done
work on Homo Sapiens in Saudi Arabia specifically. So,
uh tell us a little bit about that. What
do we know about how we moved into Saudi
Arabia, how we got there and reps, why we
moved there.
So Saudi Arabia um is an extension of what
we call the Sahara Sahara Arabian arid belt. And
this is this arid belt across the earth that
sort of moves from um the western Sahara all
the way to the sort of um western tar
desert of India. And generally, when you see environmental
amelioration in one part of it, at times, you
see amelioration across the whole belt. Um And so
we, we try to understand them together even though
there are obviously some differences. And so if we're
interested in the Sahara shrinking and how this allows
people in and out, then we also have to
ask the same questions about the Arabian deserts. And
Arabia is also very interesting because as you know,
it's this geographic nexus between Africa, Europe and Asia
and it's going to modulate those connections. So people
get out of Africa, then they have to face
these deserts. If the gate is closed and they
can't proceed. Um If it's open, then they can.
And when it's wetter, of course, they can get
into northern regions of Southwest Asia, but then they
can also move um eastwards as well. And Arabia
then is, is, is a place to try to
answer the question. So that's where the interests in
Arabia came from Arabia. When we started working, there
was also really poorly understood. So there had been
reports of lots of stone tools there, but there
were mostly surface scatters, very few excavations. Um Except
for a few done by this pioneer called Norman
Whelan, who, who, who conducted some excavations in the,
in the middle of Saudi Arabia. Uh And so
we knew that there was archaeology there just like
we knew there was archaeology in West Africa, but
no one had ever really investigated it in, in
great detail. And so we went to Saudi Arabia
with, with Michael Petrolia who, who led that project
to try to understand what was going on there.
But we never intended to find, well, we never
expected to find, I should say an environment that
had thousands of lakes at a certain point like
thousands of lakes. Um um THESE ephemeral lakes, some
of them were all year around lakes. But there
was this landscape that was, you know, full of
hippos and elephants and maybe it looks a bit
more like Eastern Africa does today. And then even
more surprisingly, we found human remains in that landscape,
not just in the form of the stone tools,
but also as fossils. So we found a human
finger bone that was dated to about 90,000 years
ago, which was really exciting because it suggested that
some of the dispersal that we see a signature
of further north in Southwest Asia in modern day
Israel, um where maybe more widespread and you know,
one of the questions was, were they still around
60,000 years ago? Probably not because it started to
become a lot more, a lot more arid then.
But it is um uh sort of building this,
this forgotten story of, of, of some of the
earlier dispersal. But now we also think maybe we,
maybe we have neanderthals in this area as well.
Maybe they're moving further south into these arid areas
because you know, the they're not much further north
to where we're looking in Saudi Arabia. So it's
not inconceivable that they're further south as well. And
then moving on in time, we find all these
uh um sort of major periods of prehistory in
the stone age represented in Arabia as well. So
we can clearly see it, it does play this
important role in modulating connections between Africa, Southwest Asia
and further a field as well. So this is
what, what really drove this realization that we can't
just look at the cause of habitation. We have
to look at the peripheries as well. And Arabia
had just has this incredibly rich archaeological record. A
very diverse archaeological record shows that people have been
going there over the past, probably like up to
a million years. Um It wouldn't surprise me and
leaving behind their diverse material culture traces, they go
extinct or they move on. The next wave comes.
So, yeah, so we had wave after wave of
humans probably coming from different regions of the old
world. Sometimes Africa, sometimes from the North, sometimes from
the East, probably coming into Arabia at different points
in time to take advantage of these ameliorated environments.
This growth of like probably savannah and gross and
like environments like we see in East Africa today.
And I think this really shows us that well,
it encapsulates this complexity of demography and human evolution.
Like who were these people? Where did they come
from? And the material culture traces are really different
with each greening episode. They come in with a
completely different material culture and even sometimes at the
same time in different parts of Arabia, you see
very, very different um material culture remains which it's
so different that it really speaks to different groups
of people. We don't know if it's different species
but definitely different groups of people. So I think
what we see in Arabia has really driven this
idea of the importance of looking at cause and
peripheries when it comes to population movements and it's
been a real revelation to see how much archaeology
there is in a place of people previously dismissed
as empty desert.
Mhm. A and by the way, when it comes
to how Saudi Arabia looks like nowadays, does it
have any, because it's much more arid than it
was back then? I mean, tens of thousands of
years ago. Does it have anything to do with
human activity?
No, I don't back then. The greening of,
of, no, I mean, I'm asking why it is
much more arid nowadays. If it, yeah, if it's
the result of human activity or, or not,
probably starting to become part of human activity. But,
um, the sort of drying trend where it started
was a natural one. But of course, as, as
we see climate change, it's getting hotter and drier
um, in, in certain parts of the world anyway.
Not, not others are getting like floods of course.
And extreme weather. So it's not, you know, a
one size fits all climate change. But, um, yes,
I mean, certainly now, um, we should be in
an interglacial period but it's not very wet in,
um, in the desert belt. Mhm. So it was
considerably wetter about 8000 years ago and has been
on a drying trend since then.
Mhm. So, Doctor Sherry, I, I'm starting to get
mindful of your time. So perhaps it would be
better for us to wrap up the interview here.
And maybe somewhere in the future we might have
another conversation just about Arabia itself, which I guess
would be very interesting. So, just before we go,
just before we go, would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Um, I have a website which is my name,
Elena sherry.com. I try to put my publications up
there wherever I'm allowed to do. So, because sometimes
there are copyright issues that I can't overcome. Um
But I try to have my papers up there.
So if anything has been interesting to anyone today,
um I, I have my scientific papers up there,
but I also like to try to reach out
in comprehensible language. So not just complicated, complicated analyses.
So I do also have some um online um
work on websites like the conversation where I try
to sort of crystallize some of these ideas in,
in, in a simpler way. And also I think
on my website, I, I have links to wherever
I can, some of the more sort of uh
popular audience pieces where I try to explain these
ideas um in a, in a simpler way as
well. Um Because you know, iii I am sure
people don't want to log in and, and read
about boring, complicated mathematical problems.
OK, great. So I'm leaving links to that in
the description box of this interview and thank you
so much again for taking the time to Come
on the show. It's been really fun to talk
to you.
Thank you so much for having me and for
the invitation. I really appreciate you reaching out and
having the opportunity. Thank you very much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall. Her
ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel S Friends
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi
na me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and Y.
Polton John Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder
Douglas Fry Franka La Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams Di A Costa, Anton Erickson. Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fists Larry Dey
Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by
Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick,
Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week in the B brand
Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentin Steinman,
Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander Albert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi. Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Lucani, Tom Vig and Bernard
N Cortes Dixon, Benedikt Muller Thomas Rumble, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, John Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick
Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi,
Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.